Fuzzing update (#124)
ethereum/solidity-blog: _posts/2021-02-09-an-introduction-to-soliditys-fuzz-testing-approach.md

---
layout: post
published: true
title: 'An Introduction to Solidity's Fuzz Testing Approach'
date: '2021-02-09'
author: Bhargava Shastry
category: Explainers
---

Security vulnerabilities and bugs detract from software quality.

> To discover them early, we have adopted fuzz testing: feeding randomly generated programs to the Solidity compiler and observing the compilation runtime and code generated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To discover them early, at best before they are released, we have adopted fuzz testing: feeding randomly generated programs to the Solidity compiler and observing the compilation runtime and code generated.
```

> Since Q1 2019, the Solidity compiler is fuzz tested via Google's [open-source software fuzz][1] (oss-fuzz) framework.

Reviewer: Does the link render properly with the space?

Reviewer: ah, it's just a regular space, not part of the link, right?

Author: Yeah, the space is part of the hyperlinked text iiuc

In this post, we briefly describe the work that has been done on this front, and work that is currently in progress.

> ### Fuzzer Overview

Reviewer: Not sure where to put that best, but maybe mention that the compiler makes very heavy use of assertions which are then hit by the fuzzer?

Reviewer: Actually you already mention that "led to an assertion failure" - maybe just extend on that?
Perhaps also mention that bugs in the frontend almost never lead to invalid code because of that.

Author: Done.

#### Example bug found by front-end fuzzer

Solidity implements the [NatSpec format][3] for code documentation.
The front-end fuzzer generated the following program that led to an assertion failure in the compiler (see Notes for more information):

```
contract C {
    ///@return
    modifier m22 {}
}

contract D is C {
    modifier m22 {}
}
```

The program was presumably mutated from the following perfectly valid test program.

```
contract C {
    modifier m22 { _; }
}
contract D is C {
}
```

The mutations prepended the `///@return` line to the modifier declaration and copied the modifier declaration to the derived contract.

A natural question is the following: How did the fuzzer "know" that this particular mutation will lead to an error?
The answer is that it does not know; the fuzzer simply mutates existing input to create new inputs and it just so happened that this mutation discovered a bug.
A follow-up question could be: How are mutations created?
Broadly speaking, mutations fall into one of the following categories:

>   - Flipping bit(s) at certain position(s) in the input stream.

Reviewer: Does the singular make sense for these? It at least should be `a bit`, so maybe just stick with `bits`?

Author: Done

Especially programs generated by a mix of randomness and human support (dictionary of Solidity keywords).
This is borne out by the test case generated by the fuzzer by, among other things, prepending the `///@return` NatSpec comment.

If you are curious as to how the fuzzer may have "synthesised" the NatSpec comment, one of the ways (caution: pure speculation) is the following:
  - In some fuzzer run `N`, adding dictionary token "//" (i.e., comment syntax in Solidity).
  - In run `N' > N`, adding dictionary token "return".
  - Finally, arriving at `///@return` through a sequence of additions/shuffling.

The Solidity fuzzing dictionary [may be found here][5].
If you spot omissions (especially those that may yield interesting mutants), please let us know.
PRs welcome. :-)

**Notes**:

This [issue][4] is a few months old and has been fixed in `0.7.6`.
The issue is that Solidity modifiers don't have return variables, and hence a `@return` NatSpec tag does not make sense.
The program above should have resulted in a parsing error (which is what the fix ensures) but instead resulted in a failed assertion.

### Back-end Fuzzers

> In order to test if code generation is sound, valid program (input) needs to be fed to the compiler.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to test if code generation is sound, a valid program (input) needs to be fed to the compiler.
```

To implement semantic fuzzers, we rely on Google's [libprotobuf-mutator][2] library.
Broadly speaking, writing a semantic fuzzer involves the following steps:
  - Write a (context-free) grammar for Solidity in the protobuf interface definition language.
  - Implement a converter interface that accepts a generation of the protobuf grammar and converts into target language.

We have implemented one such semantic fuzzer for testing the correctness of the Yul optimiser.
The fuzzer randomly generates Yul programs whose behavior is tracked pre and post optimisation in order to flag stateful divergence.
This helps us determine if a bug was introduced into the optimiser.

#### Example bug found by back-end fuzzer

The redundant assignment eliminator is a Yul optimiser step that (surpise!) removes redundant assignments to a variable.
The back-end fuzzer generated the following example that demonstrated an error in this step:

```
{
        for {let i:= 0} lt(i,2) {i := add(i,1)}
        {
                // x is declared and implicitly
                // initialized to zero.
                let x
                // This assignment is not redundant

>                 // since it is used by mstore statement
>                 // that follows the if statement

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                // since it is used by the mstore statement
                // after the if statement
```

                x := 1337
                if lt(i,1) {

>                         // This assignment is redundant

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                        // This assignment is redundant because of the `continue`
```
